### *Viola stagnina* Fen Violet 
Kit.
#### Ecology
This low-growing perennial of seasonally wet meadows and fens is found on a range of soils from clay to peaty, favouring quite high light conditions, neutral pH and low nutrients. Winter flooding and summer drought are well tolerated.
#### Status & distribution
In the British Isles this violet is most often found around the turloughs in Ireland. In Britain it has been recorded from over twenty sites in fens and river valleys in Norfolk, Suffolk, Yorkshire, Lincolnshire and Nottinghamshire.
#### Trends
Since the 1990s It has been confirmed in only three places in Britain.  Historically known from two sites in Oxfordshire - Otmoor and Menmarsh. One sighting on Otmoor in 1821; it was found again in the 1970s but immediately ploughed up.  Known at Menmarsh till 1963; the vegetation is now too dense and dry.  At Otmoor, Fen violet was re-found in 1997, in a hay meadow adjacent to the 1970s find,  following removal of scrub which had been carried out with the purpose of restoring hay meadow conditions suitable for Devils-bit Scabious, food-plant of the Marsh Fritillary butterfly.
#### Conservaton work
In 1993 the Institute of Terrestrial Ecology (now the Centre for Ecology and Hydrology CEH)  began research on Viola stagnina, under contract to English Nature. At that time, the only known extant UK sites were two fenland sites in Cambridgeshire and a few turlough margins in northern Ireland (Palmer 2006).
Monitoring by the Oxfordshire Flora Group showed an increase and then decline in numbers. It suffers in wet springs, and in 2009 formed only a few shoots and no open flowers.  Management was carried out by the tenant farmer, Terry Moore, who did further willow clearance in 2009/10 which was followed by extensive germination, flowering and seedset. Now managed by the RSPB, the hay cut is normally delayed allowing the Viola to continue releasing seed till the end of July. After commissioning a review (Palmer 2006), Natural England funded hyrdrological and soil chemistry studies as well as an introduction to the adjacent RSPB reserve using material that the Millennium Seed Bank had produced during a routine grow out. The introduced plants failed after three years, perhaps due to the heavy clay soil. Student projects under Prof. S J Harris at the Department of Biology, Oxford University showed that the level of potassium affected the ratio of chasmogamous (open) to cleistogamous (closed) flowers. A Steering Group was set up to share conservation experiences. Introductions have also been made in Oxfordshire at Cutteslowe Ponds and twice at Wytham Ditches and Flushes SSSI. Living material is held at the Oxford Botanic Garden.
